

This document is meant to outline my research plan for the next few days/weeks. The way I want to go is to go back to basics and focus on stability/see how high of an episode return we can achieve period rather than worrying about sample efficiency for now. The idea is to go back to basics and get rid of all sample efficiency tricks so that it is easier to measure which parts of the algorithm are working well and focus on those.

Clean up logging. A lot of logged items are logged way too frequently and there are too many of them. I end up looking at only a select few. The goal will be to take the northstar KPI (episode return) and try to break it down into each of the individual contributing factors based on our assumptions of why the algorithm should work, and so on. 

By getting rid of the sample efficiency tricks, the main thing that I mean is to have a mode where there is no replay buffer and we are essentially doing soft policy iteration. First we start with a base policy, which will be randomly initialized, but will have a gaussian prior energy function and zero final layer initialization so that the actions that come out of the initialized policy will be forced to be gaussian by construction. We will pass this through a rescaled normalcdf so that the actions drawn from the initialized policy are independently drawn from the uniform distribution on [-1,1] for each dimension in the action. We will run this policy, sampling from the base distribution. This will allow us to use DDIM sampling methods which are cheaper than the MALA--guided mirror descent methods that are more expensive and possibly less stable/accurate than normal DDIM. As we do this, we will use these actions and the observed rewards to estimate Q. I am currently doing TD learning, but I would like to experiment with TD-lambda, so that might require a replay buffer. I'm not sure. We keep rolling out the base policy for a long time while learning Q. We log the bellman error to see that it is going down during this process. 

Once the number of steps that we allocated to learning Q has been reached, we then assume Q is correct and enter the first policy improvement iteration. We now use this newly learned Q in order to sample actions using MGMD. Hopefully this sample from the mirror descent update policy. We copy our Q which was predicting the Q for the base policy and use it as an initialization to predict Q for our MGMD guided policy. We also copy our previous policy and use it as an initialization to train on sampled action from our MGMD guided actions. As we roll out more actions, we should see the bellman error and the policy loss come down. We should be able to observe the speed of convergence in our wandb logs in order to get an idea of how long each of these phases should be. Once the phase is deemed to be over (based on a pre-set number of iterations/env steps), we replace our base policy with the policy which we have been distilling from MGMD samples from our base policy and we replace our Q with the Q which we have been learning from our MGMD tilted actions. Once this has happened, we start our next policy improvement phase and we continue until infinity. The idea here is that this should be much more debuggable since the losses will be much more like supervised learning. Hopefully this will be more stable even though it will be less sample efficient because we are not relying on any sample efficiency tricks for now. Once we can beat the SOTA in terms of final episode return on all environments of interest, then we will start to focus on sample efficiency. 

Let’s try to break down the chain of assumptions that make up the episode return. We have episode return and a Q. First of all, let’s assume that Q is perfect and we just want to modify our policy to sample from the mirror descent update based on Q with step size eta. I think it will be difficult to actually measure the KL between the actual sampled action distribution and the ideal mirror descent update distribution because we don’t have a probability density of the actual sampled MGMD distribution. If it is possible, then let me know, even if it is expensive because it could be useful in some sort of slow debug mode which sacrifices speed to do some expensive calculations for the purposes of debugging.

However, if that’s not possible, then we could estimate improvement under the old Q of our policy improvement step that MGMD predicts somehow, like sampling many actions in each state and finding the average Q and comparing that to the average Q when the actions are reweighted according to the mirror-descent update. This should give a rough estimate of how much mirror descent predicts that policy change should improve the old value of Q. We could compare that to how much the actual MALA-guided samples improve on the old Q in order to measure how accurate our MALA-guidance is. However, this would not reveal the full story, because it could be higher sometimes and lower other times which would look right on average. Additionally, the sampling procedure could achieve this policy improvement by “collapsing” (reducing the entropy) of the update distribution more than mirror descent would dictate. This would also not show up under this metric. Try to suggest any additional metrics that would help in understanding the accuracy of the inference-time guidance method, ideally measuring the KL between the distribution of guided actions and the idealized mirror descent update. Try to split your suggestions into “cheap” metrics that could be logged during a normal training run and “expensive” metrics that would only be calculated and logged during a training run that is specifically for understanding the extent to which each of the assumptions hold and deciding on what to work on next. Again, ideally each metric is broken down into its individual contributing factors by other metrics and it is clear how sensitive each metric is to each of its contributing factors so it is easy to decide what to work on.

Once we have logged the metrics for the accuracy of the guidance procedure, we then assume that the guidance procedure is perfect for the purpose of logging the extent to which other assumptions hold. If we assume that the sampled actions are good, then we still are only improving the Q of our based policy, not our guided/mirror descent stepped policy. So we need to log the difference between the average value of our old Q under our new guided policy and the average value of Q we are learning from our new, guided policy. At the start of each policy improvement step, this quantity should be zero because the Q learning from our guided actions will be initialized with the old Q network, but as it learns from the guided actions, it will deviate (most likely it will be negative because the state distribution will shift under the new policy, which the old Q would not have been aware of, adding complexities). This will give us an idea of how big eta should be (as well as other metrics), because if it is too large, then the state distribution shift will be too large for the old Q’s signal to be useful. 

I would like to de-clutter and better organize the quantities that are logged in wandb. Hopefully, the only things that I am logging are things that directly give insight into the extent to which each assumption fails, which will help me prioritize where my efforts should go. 

In the spirit of what I have outlined here, create a concrete roadmap in a separate file. Remove all quantities that are currently being logged and add in the quantities that I described in this document. Think deeply about the spirit of what I am doing here and suggest any other quantities that should be logged continuing the spirit. Try to create a tree starting with episode return and “breaking down” each node into its constituent factors, iteratively breaking it down that way. Ideally if I have a logged quantity which has been broken down into n factors, I should be able to calculate that logged quantity analytically from the n factors, so that I have a perfect sense of how sensitive that logged quantity is to each of the n factors so that I can decide how to prioritize my time. Because of this structure, I should be able to (in theory) expand the sensitivity of episode return to logged quantities multiple levels down to help me prioritize. In practice, I know that this is intractable, especially with “cheap” metrics that I can calculate during a normal training run without slowing it down. I hope I can get closer to this ideal in a slower theoretical “debug” mode. I know I haven’t described all of the factors that would come up in doing a process like this, but maybe this is a good way to start. Try to come up with the best tree that you can in the spirit of what I have described and label each logged quantity as “cheap” or “expensive” as well as where it should appear on the roadmap. If it is related to what I have described in this document, label it as “soon”. If it is expanding a branch of the tree I have not described, label it as “later” try to think as deeply about this task as you can and be as precise as possible. Try to be as detailed and thoughtful about this task as you possibly can.

In addition to this tree, try to create as detailed a roadmap as possible based on what I have described. Try to determine, in as much detail as possible, how best to organize the future modifications to be as well organized as possible, while playing nice with existing code and especially flags which I will be playing around with in this mode to help me further optimize my algorithm.